---
title: Research projects
icon: puzzle-piece
layout: regular
---

## Recent projects

As temperatures increase, optimal climatic niches of many species are predicted
to move northward by hundreds of kilometers beyond their current limits, and
thus we might expect geographic range shifts. However, many non-climatic factors
might vary along these climatic gradients, such as human-induced disturbances,
interspecific competition and soil characteristics, with the potential to stop,
slow down or accelerate potential range shifts.

Much of my current research centers around understanding and disentangling the
influence of these factors on forest community changes from 3 different points
of view: (1) ß diversity and community composition, (2) community transition
dynamics and (3) functional traits. To address these challenges, I use a
long-term dataset (1970-2016) of ca. 6000 permanent forest plots from Quebec.

<!--
### 1. Understanding biodiversity changes at large spatial scales

Global environmental change is likely to force major shifts in species distributions. Because tree species differ in their demographic rates, dispersal abilities and fundamental niches, communities are unlikely to move as a unit, resulting in community reshuffling.

In this project, I investigate several aspects of temporal forest community changes and address these four questions: (1) How has the composition of forest communities changed in the last decades? (2) What are the main drivers of these temporal ß diversity changes? (3) What part of these changes can be associated with a community *thermophilization* induced by climate change compared to succession induced by disturbances? (4) Which species are contributing to these community changes? Here is a link to a recent [poster](https://kevcaz.github.io/talks/posters/ESA_MH_2018.png) related to this project.

### 2. Non-climatic constraints on community transition dynamics under climate change.

Several North American temperate tree species are expected to expand their distributions northward where boreal forest is already established and dominated by conifers. However, these transitions from mixed to temperate forests as well as from boreal to mixed forests may be difficult not only because they are long-lived species, but also because of soil properties (substrate, drainage, and nutrient availability) and of competition by resident species which could hinder their establishment. If competition is an important constraint to transition then we can wonder if disturbances, by reducing competition, can accelerate the effect of climate change.

Using a multinomial state-and-transition model, I aim to estimate transition probabilities among different community types (i.e. temperate, pioneer, mixed, boreal) as a function of climate, soil, natural and human disturbances, and neighborhood information at time $t-1$. Specifically, I want to (1) characterize the community transitions that occurred in the past decades, (2) quantify how environmental factors influence the probability of these transitions, and (3) determine if disturbances, such as harvesting, can accelerate climate related transitions. Here is a link to a [talk](https://www.dropbox.com/s/8jjm0xizurssq0x/Brice_FQ.pdf?dl=0) (in french) on community transition.

### 3. Bayesian modeling of demographic rates

While the interest in the effects of climate on biodiversity is increasing, a great deal of studies have focused on detecting recent shifts in species range limits. However, demographic rates are the key underlying factors controlling the long-term dynamics of forests. Hence, focusing on species range shifts misses the population-level processes preceding these shifts, i.e. the changes in demographic rates that lead to local extinctions and colonizations and, ultimately, to range shifts.

In this project, my colleagues and I are building bayesian models to understand how mortality, growth and recruitment are influenced by tree attributes (species and individual tree size), stand level competition, and climate conditions. Using these demographic models, I am interested to identify what other factors, such as anthropogenic and natural disturbances as well as local environmental heterogeneity from soil types, may facilitate or impede climate-driven forest shifts through their effects on tree demography. Here is the a [draft](https://www.dropbox.com/home/background?preview=rapport.pdf) with preliminary analysis of our work.

-->

## Past research

### Impact of urbanization on riparian plant communities

For my [master thesis](https://papyrus.bib.umontreal.ca/xmlui/handle/1866/13639), at the Institut de recherche en biologie végétale, I investigated the impact of urbanization on riparian plant communities, combining a functional trait approach with landscape and historical ecology. Hydrological disturbances are an inherent feature of riparian ecosystems, which exert a strong and selective filter on plant communities. However, in cities, human-induced disturbances have long lasting consequences that can disrupt these fundamental ecological processes. To better understand how riparian plant communities respond to both urbanization and hydrological disturbances, we surveyed 57 riparian forests of the Montreal area along a gradient of urbanization and inundation intensity.

{{< imgcenter "/img/riparian.JPG" 50 >}}


My [first chapter](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jvs.12425) aimed to unravel the role of natural and anthropogenic *filters*, as well as spatial processes, on community species and trait composition. We found that the effect of urbanization was principally indirect, through historical alteration of hydrological disturbances. This change in flooding regime allowed upland species to invade the formerly dynamic riparian habitat and led to a terrestrialization of riparian communities. Therefore, to limit the terrestrialization process and to maintain the functional diversity and composition of riparian forests, management strategies in urban areas should aim at restoring or preserving the natural hydrological processes.

My [second chapter](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ddi.12565) focused on biotic homogenization. While urbanization is generally associated with biotic homogenization (decrease in ß diversity) of communities worldwide, its effect depends on the scale of the study and the local context. Here, we showed that urbanization instead led to taxonomic and functional differentiation of riparian communities, as well as to a loss in local species richness. We hypothesized that the biotic differentiation process was twofold: urbanization 1) creates new habitats by reducing flooding intensity (which is an important homogenizing filter on species and traits), and 2) triggers species losses by reducing habitat size.

<br>

<img style="float: right; width:30%;margin: 1%" src="/img/parthenocissus.JPG">
### Impact of urban heat islands on liana abundance

During a
honor's research project, I studied the [impact of urbanization on liana
abundance in temperate
forests](http://www.biopolis.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Brice_liana_distribution.pdf).
More precisely, we investigated the local and landscape drivers of liana
abundance in 50 forests of the metropolitan Montréal area. We focused on the 6
most common lianas (i.e. woody vines) of the study area: *Celastrus scandens*,
*Menispermum canadense*, *Parthenocissus quinquefolia*, *Solanum dulcamara*,
*Toxicodendron radicans*, and *Vitis riparia*. Overall, our results show that
lianas benefit greatly from disturbances associated with urbanization at both
local and landscape scales. At the landscape scale, lianas benefited from
urbanization, mainly through warm microclimates created by urban heat islands
(UHI) as these species are not well adapted to cold climates. At the forest
scale, lianas were more abundant in disturbed forests and in edge habitats,
where their fast growth rate enables them to take advantage of high light
availability. Hence, with intensifying urbanization, lianas will likely become
more abundant in northern cities.
